                                                      Neural Ordinary Differential Equations


                                                   Ricky T. Q. Chen*, Yulia Rubanova*, Jesse Bettencourt*, David Duvenaud
                                                                     University of Toronto, Vector Institute
                                                      {rtqichen, rubanova, jessebett, duvenaud}@cs.toronto.edu




arXiv:1806.07366v5 [cs.LG] 14 Dec 2019
                                                                                      Abstract
                                                  We introduce a new family of deep neural network models. Instead of specifying a
                                                  discrete sequence of hidden layers, we parameterize the derivative of the hidden
                                                  state using a neural network. The output of the network is computed using a black-
                                                  box differential equation solver. These continuous-depth models have constant
                                                  memory cost, adapt their evaluation strategy to each input, and can explicitly trade
                                                  numerical precision for speed. We demonstrate these properties in continuous-depth
                                                  residual networks and continuous-time latent variable models. We also construct
                                                  continuous normalizing flows, a generative model that can train by maximum
                                                  likelihood, without partitioning or ordering the data dimensions. For training, we
                                                  show how to scalably backpropagate through any ODE solver, without access to its
                                                  internal operations. This allows end-to-end training of ODEs within larger models.


                                         1   Introduction
                                                                                                         Residual Network                      ODE Network
                                                                                                         5                                 5
                                         Models such as residual networks, recurrent neural
                                         network decoders, and normalizing flows build com-              4                                 4
                                         plicated transformations by composing a sequence of
                                         transformations to a hidden state:                              3                                 3
                                                                                                 Depth                             Depth
                                                        ht+1 = ht + f (ht , θt )           (1)           2                                 2
                                                                           D
                                         where t ∈ {0 . . . T } and ht ∈ R . These iterative             1                                 1
                                         updates can be seen as an Euler discretization of a
                                         continuous transformation (Lu et al., 2017; Haber               0     5      0      5             0     5      0      5
                                         and Ruthotto, 2017; Ruthotto and Haber, 2018).                      Input/Hidden/Output               Input/Hidden/Output
                                         What happens as we add more layers and take smaller      Figure 1: Left: A Residual network defines a
                                         steps? In the limit, we parameterize the continuous      discrete sequence of finite transformations.
                                         dynamics of hidden units using an ordinary differen-     Right: A ODE network defines a vector
                                         tial equation (ODE) specified by a neural network:       field, which continuously transforms the state.
                                                         dh(t)                                    Both: Circles represent evaluation locations.
                                                                = f (h(t), t, θ)           (2)
                                                           dt
                                         Starting from the input layer h(0), we can define the output layer h(T ) to be the solution to this
                                         ODE initial value problem at some time T . This value can be computed by a black-box differential
                                         equation solver, which evaluates the hidden unit dynamics f wherever necessary to determine the
                                         solution with the desired accuracy. Figure 1 contrasts these two approaches.
                                         Defining and evaluating models using ODE solvers has several benefits:

                                         Memory efficiency In Section 2, we show how to compute gradients of a scalar-valued loss with
                                         respect to all inputs of any ODE solver, without backpropagating through the operations of the solver.
                                         Not storing any intermediate quantities of the forward pass allows us to train our models with constant
                                         memory cost as a function of depth, a major bottleneck of training deep models.

                                         32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.
Adaptive computation Euler’s method is perhaps the simplest method for solving ODEs. There
have since been more than 120 years of development of efficient and accurate ODE solvers (Runge,
1895; Kutta, 1901; Hairer et al., 1987). Modern ODE solvers provide guarantees about the growth
of approximation error, monitor the level of error, and adapt their evaluation strategy on the fly to
achieve the requested level of accuracy. This allows the cost of evaluating a model to scale with
problem complexity. After training, accuracy can be reduced for real-time or low-power applications.

Scalable and invertible normalizing flows An unexpected side-benefit of continuous transforma-
tions is that the change of variables formula becomes easier to compute. In Section 4, we derive
this result and use it to construct a new class of invertible density models that avoids the single-unit
bottleneck of normalizing flows, and can be trained directly by maximum likelihood.

Continuous time-series models Unlike recurrent neural networks, which require discretizing
observation and emission intervals, continuously-defined dynamics can naturally incorporate data
which arrives at arbitrary times. In Section 5, we construct and demonstrate such a model.

2   Reverse-mode automatic differentiation of ODE solutions
The main technical difficulty in training continuous-depth networks is performing reverse-mode
differentiation (also known as backpropagation) through the ODE solver. Differentiating through
the operations of the forward pass is straightforward, but incurs a high memory cost and introduces
additional numerical error.
We treat the ODE solver as a black box, and compute gradients using the adjoint sensitivity
method (Pontryagin et al., 1962). This approach computes gradients by solving a second, aug-
mented ODE backwards in time, and is applicable to all ODE solvers. This approach scales linearly
with problem size, has low memory cost, and explicitly controls numerical error.
Consider optimizing a scalar-valued loss function L(), whose input is the result of an ODE solver:
                                Z t1                 
        L(z(t1 )) = L z(t0 ) +        f (z(t), t, θ)dt = L (ODESolve(z(t0 ), f, t0 , t1 , θ))   (3)
                                     t0

                                                              To optimize L, we require gradients with respect
                                                              to θ. The first step is to determining how the
                                                              gradient of the loss depends on the hidden state
                                                              z(t) at each instant. This quantity is called the
                                                              adjoint a(t) = ∂L/∂z(t). Its dynamics are given
                                                              by another ODE, which can be thought of as the
                                          State
                                                              instantaneous analog of the chain rule:
                                          Adjoint State
                                                                       da(t)              ∂f (z(t), t, θ)
                                                                              = −a(t)T                        (4)
                                                                         dt                    ∂z
                                                              We can compute ∂L/∂z(t0 ) by another call to an
                                                              ODE solver. This solver must run backwards,
                                                              starting from the initial value of ∂L/∂z(t1 ). One
                                                              complication is that solving this ODE requires
Figure 2: Reverse-mode differentiation of an ODE              the knowing value of z(t) along its entire tra-
solution. The adjoint sensitivity method solves               jectory. However, we can simply recompute
an augmented ODE backwards in time. The aug-                  z(t) backwards in time together with the adjoint,
mented system contains both the original state and            starting from its final value z(t1 ).
the sensitivity of the loss with respect to the state.
If the loss depends directly on the state at multi- Computing the gradients with respect to the pa-
ple observation times, the adjoint state must be rameters θ requires evaluating a third integral,
updated in the direction of the partial derivative of which depends on both z(t) and a(t):
the loss with respect to each observation.                 dL
                                                                   Z t0
                                                                              ∂f (z(t), t, θ)
                                                               =−       a(t)T                 dt (5)
                                                            dθ       t1            ∂θ
The vector-Jacobian products a(t)T ∂f               T ∂f
                                       ∂z and a(t) ∂θ in (4) and (5) can be efficiently evaluated by
automatic differentiation, at a time cost similar to that of evaluating f . All integrals for solving z, a


                                                          2
and ∂L
     ∂θ can be computed in a single call to an ODE solver, which concatenates the original state, the
adjoint, and the other partial derivatives into a single vector. Algorithm 1 shows how to construct the
necessary dynamics, and call an ODE solver to compute all gradients at once.

Algorithm 1 Reverse-mode derivative of an ODE initial value problem
Input: dynamics parameters θ, start time t0 , stop time t1 , final state z(t1 ), loss gradient ∂L/∂z(t1 )
                    ∂L
  s0 = [z(t1 ), ∂z(t   1)
                          , 0|θ| ]                                       . Define initial augmented state
  def aug_dynamics([z(t), a(t), ·], t, θ):                        . Define dynamics on augmented state
                                               T ∂f
      return [f (z(t), t, θ), −a(t)T ∂f
                                     ∂z , −a(t) ∂θ ]                . Compute vector-Jacobian products
            ∂L       ∂L
  [z(t0 ), ∂z(t0 ) , ∂θ ] = ODESolve(s0 , aug_dynamics, t1 , t0 , θ)          . Solve reverse-time ODE
           ∂L      ∂L
return ∂z(t0 ) , ∂θ                                                                    . Return gradients


Most ODE solvers have the option to output the state z(t) at multiple times. When the loss depends
on these intermediate states, the reverse-mode derivative must be broken into a sequence of separate
solves, one between each consecutive pair of output times (Figure 2). At each observation, the adjoint
must be adjusted in the direction of the corresponding partial derivative ∂L/∂z(ti ).
The results above extend those of Stapor et al. (2018, section 2.4.2). An extended version of
Algorithm 1 including derivatives w.r.t. t0 and t1 can be found in Appendix C. Detailed derivations
are provided in Appendix B. Appendix D provides Python code which computes all derivatives for
scipy.integrate.odeint by extending the autograd automatic differentiation package. This
code also supports all higher-order derivatives. We have since released a PyTorch (Paszke et al.,
2017) implementation, including GPU-based implementations of several standard ODE solvers at
github.com/rtqichen/torchdiffeq.


3   Replacing residual networks with ODEs for supervised learning

In this section, we experimentally investigate the training of neural ODEs for supervised learning.

Software To solve ODE initial value problems numerically, we use the implicit Adams method
implemented in LSODE and VODE and interfaced through the scipy.integrate package. Being
an implicit method, it has better guarantees than explicit methods such as Runge-Kutta but requires
solving a nonlinear optimization problem at every step. This setup makes direct backpropagation
through the integrator difficult. We implement the adjoint sensitivity method in Python’s autograd
framework (Maclaurin et al., 2015). For the experiments in this section, we evaluated the hidden
state dynamics and their derivatives on the GPU using Tensorflow, which were then called from the
Fortran ODE solvers, which were called from Python autograd code.
                                                                                       †
Model Architectures We experiment with a Table 1: Performance on MNIST. From LeCun
small residual network which downsamples the et al. (1998).
input twice then applies 6 standard residual
blocks He et al. (2016b), which are replaced                       Test Error # Params Memory Time
                                                               †
by an ODESolve module in the ODE-Net vari-          1-Layer MLP     1.60%      0.24 M      -      -
ant. We also test a network with the same archi-    ResNet          0.41%      0.60 M    O(L)   O(L)
tecture but where gradients are backpropagated      RK-Net          0.47%      0.22 M    O(L̃)  O(L̃)
                                                    ODE-Net         0.42%      0.22 M    O(1)   O(L̃)
directly through a Runge-Kutta integrator, re-
ferred to as RK-Net. Table 1 shows test error, number of parameters, and memory cost. L denotes
the number of layers in the ResNet, and L̃ is the number of function evaluations that the ODE solver
requests in a single forward pass, which can be interpreted as an implicit number of layers. We find
that ODE-Nets and RK-Nets can achieve around the same performance as the ResNet.

Error Control in ODE-Nets ODE solvers can approximately ensure that the output is within a
given tolerance of the true solution. Changing this tolerance changes the behavior of the network.
We first verify that error can indeed be controlled in Figure 3a. The time spent by the forward call is
proportional to the number of function evaluations (Figure 3b), so tuning the tolerance gives us a


                                                   3
trade-off between accuracy and computational cost. One could train with high accuracy, but switch to
a lower accuracy at test time.




        Figure 3: Statistics of a trained ODE-Net. (NFE = number of function evaluations.)

Figure 3c) shows a surprising result: the number of evaluations in the backward pass is roughly
half of the forward pass. This suggests that the adjoint sensitivity method is not only more memory
efficient, but also more computationally efficient than directly backpropagating through the integrator,
because the latter approach will need to backprop through each function evaluation in the forward
pass.

Network Depth It’s not clear how to define the ‘depth‘ of an ODE solution. A related quantity is
the number of evaluations of the hidden state dynamics required, a detail delegated to the ODE solver
and dependent on the initial state or input. Figure 3d shows that he number of function evaluations
increases throughout training, presumably adapting to increasing complexity of the model.

4   Continuous Normalizing Flows
The discretized equation (1) also appears in normalizing flows (Rezende and Mohamed, 2015) and
the NICE framework (Dinh et al., 2014). These methods use the change of variables theorem to
compute exact changes in probability if samples are transformed through a bijective function f :
                                                                        ∂f
                    z1 = f (z0 ) =⇒ log p(z1 ) = log p(z0 ) − log det                            (6)
                                                                        ∂z0
An example is the planar normalizing flow (Rezende and Mohamed, 2015):
                                                                                        ∂h
      z(t + 1) = z(t) + uh(wT z(t) + b), log p(z(t + 1)) = log p(z(t)) − log 1 + uT              (7)
                                                                                         ∂z
Generally, the main bottleneck to using the change of variables formula is computing of the deter-
minant of the Jacobian ∂f/∂z, which has a cubic cost in either the dimension of z, or the number
of hidden units. Recent work explores the tradeoff between the expressiveness of normalizing flow
layers and computational cost (Kingma et al., 2016; Tomczak and Welling, 2016; Berg et al., 2018).
Surprisingly, moving from a discrete set of layers to a continuous transformation simplifies the
computation of the change in normalizing constant:
Theorem 1 (Instantaneous Change of Variables). Let z(t) be a finite continuous random variable
with probability p(z(t)) dependent on time. Let dz
                                                 dt = f (z(t), t) be a differential equation describing
a continuous-in-time transformation of z(t). Assuming that f is uniformly Lipschitz continuous in z
and continuous in t, then the change in log probability also follows a differential equation,
                                                                
                                   ∂ log p(z(t))            df
                                                  = −tr                                             (8)
                                         ∂t               dz(t)
Proof in Appendix A. Instead of the log determinant in (6), we now only require a trace operation.
Also unlike standard finite flows, the differential equation f does not need to be bijective, since if
uniqueness is satisfied, then the entire transformation is automatically bijective.
As an example application of the instantaneous change of variables, we can examine the continuous
analog of the planar flow, and its change in normalization constant:
                       dz(t)                       ∂ log p(z(t))         ∂h
                             = uh(wT z(t) + b),                  = −uT                        (9)
                        dt                               ∂t            ∂z(t)


                                                   4
Given an initial distribution p(z(0)), we can sample from p(z(t)) and evaluate its density by solving
this combined ODE.

Using multiple hiddenP units withP linear cost While det is not a linear function, the trace function
is, which implies tr( n Jn ) = n tr(Jn ). Thus if our dynamics is given by a sum of functions then
the differential equation for the log density is also a sum:
                                 M                                 M          
                       dz(t) X                     d log p(z(t)) X         ∂fn
                              =      fn (z(t)),                 =     tr                         (10)
                        dt      n=1
                                                         dt       n=1
                                                                           ∂z

This means we can cheaply evaluate flow models having many hidden units, with a cost only linear in
the number of hidden units M . Evaluating such ‘wide’ flow layers using standard normalizing flows
costs O(M 3 ), meaning that standard NF architectures use many layers of only a single hidden unit.

Time-dependent dynamics We can specify the parameters of a flow as a function of t, making the
differential equation f (z(t), t) change with t. This is parameterization is a kind of hypernetwork   (Ha
et al., 2016). We also introduce a gating mechanism for each hidden unit, dz
                                                                                         P
                                                                                   dt =    n σ n (t)f n (z)
where σn (t) ∈ (0, 1) is a neural network that learns when the dynamic fn (z) should be applied. We
call these models continuous normalizing flows (CNF).

4.1   Experiments with Continuous Normalizing Flows

We first compare continuous and discrete planar flows at learning to sample from a known distribution.
We show that a planar CNF with M hidden units can be at least as expressive as a planar NF with
K = M layers, and sometimes much more expressive.

Density matching We configure the CNF as described above, and train for 10,000 iterations
using Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2014). In contrast, the NF is trained for 500,000 iterations using
RMSprop (Hinton et al., 2012), as suggested by Rezende and Mohamed (2015). For this task, we
minimize KL (q(x)kp(x)) as the loss function where q is the flow model and the target density p(·)
can be evaluated. Figure 4 shows that CNF generally achieves lower loss.

Maximum Likelihood Training A useful property of continuous-time normalizing flows is that
we can compute the reverse transformation for about the same cost as the forward pass, which cannot
be said for normalizing flows. This lets us train the flow on a density estimation task by performing
maximum likelihood estimation, which maximizes Ep(x) [log q(x)] where q(·) is computed using
the appropriate change of variables theorem, then afterwards reverse the CNF to generate random
samples from q(x).
For this task, we use 64 hidden units for CNF, and 64 stacked one-hidden-unit layers for NF. Figure 5
shows the learned dynamics. Instead of showing the initial Gaussian distribution, we display the

                        K=2     K=8       K=32          M=2      M=8      M=32
                                                                                                 CNF
                                                                                                 NF

       1
                                                                                       10   20   30
                                                                                                 CNF
                                                                                                 NF

       2
                                                                                       10   20   30
                                                                                                 CNF
                                                                                                 NF

       3
                                                                                       10   20   30
           (a) Target           (b) NF                         (c) CNF             (d) Loss vs. K/M
Figure 4: Comparison of normalizing flows versus continuous normalizing flows. The model capacity
of normalizing flows is determined by their depth (K), while continuous normalizing flows can also
increase capacity by increasing width (M), making them easier to train.


                                                    5
                  5%      20%        40%    60%     80% 100%                                          5%    20%    40%      60%     80% 100%



Samples Density                                                                    Samples Density


                                                                      Target                                                                           Target
NF                                                                                 NF

                                       (a) Two Circles                                                              (b) Two Moons
Figure 5: Visualizing the transformation from noise to data. Continuous-time normalizing flows
are reversible, so we can train on a density estimation task and still be able to sample from the learned
density efficiently.


transformed distribution after a small amount of time which shows the locations of the initial planar
flows. Interestingly, to fit the Two Circles distribution, the CNF rotates the planar flows so that
the particles can be evenly spread into circles. While the CNF transformations are smooth and
interpretable, we find that NF transformations are very unintuitive and this model has difficulty fitting
the two moons dataset in Figure 5b.

5                 A generative latent function time-series model
Applying neural networks to irregularly-sampled data such as medical records, network traffic, or
neural spiking data is difficult. Typically, observations are put into bins of fixed duration, and the
latent dynamics are discretized in the same way. This leads to difficulties with missing data and ill-
defined latent variables. Missing data can be addressed using generative time-series models (Álvarez
and Lawrence, 2011; Futoma et al., 2017; Mei and Eisner, 2017; Soleimani et al., 2017a) or data
imputation (Che et al., 2018). Another approach concatenates time-stamp information to the input of
an RNN (Choi et al., 2016; Lipton et al., 2016; Du et al., 2016; Li, 2017).
We present a continuous-time, generative approach to modeling time series. Our model represents
each time series by a latent trajectory. Each trajectory is determined from a local initial state, zt0 , and
a global set of latent dynamics shared across all time series. Given observation times t0 , t1 , . . . , tN
and an initial state zt0 , an ODE solver produces zt1 , . . . , ztN , which describe the latent state at each
observation.We define this generative model formally through a sampling procedure:
                                                                 zt0 ∼ p(zt0 )                                                                           (11)
                                             zt1 , zt2 , . . . , ztN = ODESolve(zt0 , f, θf , t0 , . . . , tN )                                          (12)
                                                     each xti ∼ p(x|zti , θx )                                                                           (13)

Function f is a time-invariant function that takes the value z at the current time step and outputs the
gradient: ∂z(t)/∂t = f (z(t), θf ). We parametrize this function using a neural net. Because f is time-


                                                                                                              ODE Solve(zt0 , f, ✓f , t0 , ..., tM )
                                     RNN encoder                   q(zt0 |xt0 ...xtN )                      zt 1                      ztN +1 ztM
                   ht 0         ht 1              ht N                                               zt 0                    zt N
                                                                          µ
                                           …                                   ~
                                                         Latent space
                                                         Data space

  Time                                    x(t)                                                                      x̂(t)
                   t0           t1                tN       tN +1       tM                            t0      t1              tN        tN +1     tM
                                Observed                    Unobserved                                       Prediction                 Extrapolation
                                            Figure 6: Computation graph of the latent ODE model.


                                                                               6
invariant, given any latent state z(t), the entire latent trajectory is uniquely defined. Extrapolating
this latent trajectory lets us make predictions arbitrarily far forwards or backwards in time.

Training and Prediction We can train this latent-variable model as a variational autoen-
coder (Kingma and Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014), with sequence-valued observations. Our
recognition net is an RNN, which consumes the data sequentially backwards in time, and out-
puts qφ (z0 |x1 , x2 , . . . , xN ). A detailed algorithm can be found in Appendix E. Using ODEs as a
generative model allows us to make predictions for arbitrary time points t1 ...tM on a continuous
timeline.

Poisson Process likelihoods The fact that an observation oc-
curred often tells us something about the latent state. For ex-
ample, a patient may be more likely to take a medical test if            λ(t)
they are sick. The rate of events can be parameterized by a
function of the latent state: p(event at time t| z(t)) = λ(z(t)).
Given this rate function, the likelihood of a set of indepen-
dent observation times in the interval [tstart , tend ] is given by an                        t
inhomogeneous Poisson process (Palm, 1943):                                 Figure 7: Fitting a latent ODE dy-
                                                                            namics model with a Poisson pro-
                                       N                  Z tend
                                      X                                     cess likelihood. Dots show event
log p(t1 . . . tN | tstart , tend ) =     log λ(z(ti )) −         λ(z(t))dt times. The line is the learned inten-
                                                           tstart
                                      i=1                                   sity λ(t) of the Poisson process.
We can parameterize λ(·) using another neural network. Con-
veniently, we can evaluate both the latent trajectory and the
Poisson process likelihood together in a single call to an ODE solver. Figure 7 shows the event rate
learned by such a model on a toy dataset.
A Poisson process likelihood on observation
times can be combined with a data likelihood to
jointly model all observations and the times at
which they were made.

5.1   Time-series Latent ODE Experiments                             (a) Recurrent Neural Network

We investigate the ability of the latent ODE
model to fit and extrapolate time series. The
recognition network is an RNN with 25 hidden
units. We use a 4-dimensional latent space. We
parameterize the dynamics function f with a
one-hidden-layer network with 20 hidden units.
The decoder computing p(xti |zti ) is another              (b) Latent Neural Ordinary Differential Equation
neural network with one hidden layer with 20                       Ground Truth
hidden units. Our baseline was a recurrent neu-                    Observation
ral net with 25 hidden units trained to minimize                   Prediction
negative Gaussian log-likelihood. We trained a                     Extrapolation
second version of this RNN whose inputs were
concatenated with the time difference to the next
observation to aid RNN with irregular observa-                                        (c) Latent Trajectories
tions.
                                                  Figure 8: (a): Reconstruction and extrapolation
                                                  of spirals with irregular time points by a recurrent
Bi-directional spiral dataset We generated neural network. (b): Reconstructions and extrapo-
a dataset of 1000 2-dimensional spirals, each lations by a latent neural ODE. Blue curve shows
starting at a different point, sampled at 100 model prediction. Red shows extrapolation. (c) A
equally-spaced timesteps. The dataset contains projection of inferred 4-dimensional latent ODE
two types of spirals: half are clockwise while trajectories onto their first two dimensions. Color
the other half counter-clockwise. To make the indicates the direction of the corresponding trajec-
task more realistic, we add gaussian noise to the tory. The model has learned latent dynamics which
observations.                                     distinguishes the two directions.

                                                       7
Figure 9: Data-space trajectories decoded from varying one dimension of zt0 . Color indicates
progression through time, starting at purple and ending at red. Note that the trajectories on the left
are counter-clockwise, while the trajectories on the right are clockwise.


Time series with irregular time points To generate irregular timestamps, we randomly sample
points from each trajectory without replacement (n = {30, 50, 100}). We report predictive root-
mean-squared error (RMSE) on 100 time points extending beyond those that were used for training.
Table 2 shows that the latent ODE has substantially lower predictive RMSE.
Figure 8 shows examples of spiral reconstruc-          Table 2: Predictive RMSE on test set
tions with 30 sub-sampled points. Reconstruc-
tions from the latent ODE were obtained by sam- # Observations 30/100 50/100 100/100
pling from the posterior over latent trajectories  RNN               0.3937 0.3202 0.1813
and decoding it to data-space. Examples with       Latent ODE        0.1642 0.1502 0.1346
varying number of time points are shown in Ap-
pendix F. We observed that reconstructions and extrapolations are consistent with the ground truth
regardless of number of observed points and despite the noise.

Latent space interpolation Figure 8c shows latent trajectories projected onto the first two dimen-
sions of the latent space. The trajectories form two separate clusters of trajectories, one decoding to
clockwise spirals, the other to counter-clockwise. Figure 9 shows that the latent trajectories change
smoothly as a function of the initial point z(t0 ), switching from a clockwise to a counter-clockwise
spiral.


6   Scope and Limitations

Minibatching The use of mini-batches is less straightforward than for standard neural networks.
One can still batch together evaluations through the ODE solver by concatenating the states of each
batch element together, creating a combined ODE with dimension D × K. In some cases, controlling
error on all batch elements together might require evaluating the combined system K times more
often than if each system was solved individually. However, in practice the number of evaluations did
not increase substantially when using minibatches.

Uniqueness When do continuous dynamics have a unique solution? Picard’s existence theo-
rem (Coddington and Levinson, 1955) states that the solution to an initial value problem exists and is
unique if the differential equation is uniformly Lipschitz continuous in z and continuous in t. This
theorem holds for our model if the neural network has finite weights and uses Lipshitz nonlinearities,
such as tanh or relu.

Setting tolerances Our framework allows the user to trade off speed for precision, but requires
the user to choose an error tolerance on both the forward and reverse passes during training. For
sequence modeling, the default value of 1.5e-8 was used. In the classification and density estimation
experiments, we were able to reduce the tolerance to 1e-3 and 1e-5, respectively, without degrading
performance.

Reconstructing forward trajectories Reconstructing the state trajectory by running the dynamics
backwards can introduce extra numerical error if the reconstructed trajectory diverges from the
original. This problem can be addressed by checkpointing: storing intermediate values of z on the
forward pass, and reconstructing the exact forward trajectory by re-integrating from those points. We
did not find this to be a practical problem, and we informally checked that reversing many layers of
continuous normalizing flows with default tolerances recovered the initial states.


                                                  8
7   Related Work
The use of the adjoint method for training continuous-time neural networks was previously pro-
posed (LeCun et al., 1988; Pearlmutter, 1995), though was not demonstrated practically. The
interpretation of residual networks He et al. (2016a) as approximate ODE solvers spurred research
into exploiting reversibility and approximate computation in ResNets (Chang et al., 2017; Lu et al.,
2017). We demonstrate these same properties in more generality by directly using an ODE solver.

Adaptive computation One can adapt computation time by training secondary neural networks
to choose the number of evaluations of recurrent or residual networks (Graves, 2016; Jernite et al.,
2016; Figurnov et al., 2017; Chang et al., 2018). However, this introduces overhead both at training
and test time, and extra parameters that need to be fit. In contrast, ODE solvers offer well-studied,
computationally cheap, and generalizable rules for adapting the amount of computation.

Constant memory backprop through reversibility Recent work developed reversible versions
of residual networks (Gomez et al., 2017; Haber and Ruthotto, 2017; Chang et al., 2017), which gives
the same constant memory advantage as our approach. However, these methods require restricted
architectures, which partition the hidden units. Our approach does not have these restrictions.

Learning differential equations Much recent work has proposed learning differential equations
from data. One can train feed-forward or recurrent neural networks to approximate a differential
equation (Raissi and Karniadakis, 2018; Raissi et al., 2018a; Long et al., 2017), with applica-
tions such as fluid simulation (Wiewel et al., 2018). There is also significant work on connecting
Gaussian Processes (GPs) and ODE solvers (Schober et al., 2014). GPs have been adapted to fit
differential equations (Raissi et al., 2018b) and can naturally model continuous-time effects and
interventions (Soleimani et al., 2017b; Schulam and Saria, 2017). Ryder et al. (2018) use stochastic
variational inference to recover the solution of a given stochastic differential equation.

Differentiating through ODE solvers The dolfin library (Farrell et al., 2013) implements adjoint
computation for general ODE and PDE solutions, but only by backpropagating through the individual
operations of the forward solver. The Stan library (Carpenter et al., 2015) implements gradient
estimation through ODE solutions using forward sensitivity analysis. However, forward sensitivity
analysis is quadratic-time in the number of variables, whereas the adjoint sensitivity analysis is
linear (Carpenter et al., 2015; Zhang and Sandu, 2014). Melicher et al. (2017) used the adjoint
method to train bespoke latent dynamic models.
In contrast, by providing a generic vector-Jacobian product, we allow an ODE solver to be trained
end-to-end with any other differentiable model components. While use of vector-Jacobian products
for solving the adjoint method has been explored in optimal control (Andersson, 2013; Andersson
et al., In Press, 2018), we highlight the potential of a general integration of black-box ODE solvers
into automatic differentiation (Baydin et al., 2018) for deep learning and generative modeling.

8   Conclusion
We investigated the use of black-box ODE solvers as a model component, developing new models
for time-series modeling, supervised learning, and density estimation. These models are evaluated
adaptively, and allow explicit control of the tradeoff between computation speed and accuracy.
Finally, we derived an instantaneous version of the change of variables formula, and developed
continuous-time normalizing flows, which can scale to large layer sizes.

9   Acknowledgements
We thank Wenyi Wang and Geoff Roeder for help with proofs, and Daniel Duckworth, Ethan Fetaya,
Hossein Soleimani, Eldad Haber, Ken Caluwaerts, Daniel Flam-Shepherd, and Harry Braviner for
feedback. We thank Chris Rackauckas, Dougal Maclaurin, and Matthew James Johnson for helpful
discussions. We also thank Yuval Frommer for pointing out an unsupported claim about parameter
efficiency.


                                                 9
References
Mauricio A Álvarez and Neil D Lawrence. Computationally efficient convolved multiple output
 Gaussian processes. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12(May):1459–1500, 2011.
Brandon Amos and J Zico Kolter. OptNet: Differentiable optimization as a layer in neural networks.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 136–145, 2017.
Joel Andersson. A general-purpose software framework for dynamic optimization. PhD thesis, 2013.
Joel A E Andersson, Joris Gillis, Greg Horn, James B Rawlings, and Moritz Diehl. CasADi – A
  software framework for nonlinear optimization and optimal control. Mathematical Programming
  Computation, In Press, 2018.
Atilim Gunes Baydin, Barak A Pearlmutter, Alexey Andreyevich Radul, and Jeffrey Mark Siskind.
  Automatic differentiation in machine learning: a survey. Journal of machine learning research, 18
  (153):1–153, 2018.
Rianne van den Berg, Leonard Hasenclever, Jakub M Tomczak, and Max Welling. Sylvester
  normalizing flows for variational inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.05649, 2018.
Bob Carpenter, Matthew D Hoffman, Marcus Brubaker, Daniel Lee, Peter Li, and Michael Betan-
  court. The Stan math library: Reverse-mode automatic differentiation in c++. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1509.07164, 2015.
Bo Chang, Lili Meng, Eldad Haber, Lars Ruthotto, David Begert, and Elliot Holtham. Reversible
  architectures for arbitrarily deep residual neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.03698, 2017.
Bo Chang, Lili Meng, Eldad Haber, Frederick Tung, and David Begert. Multi-level residual networks
  from dynamical systems view. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=SyJS-OgR-.
Zhengping Che, Sanjay Purushotham, Kyunghyun Cho, David Sontag, and Yan Liu. Recurrent neural
  networks for multivariate time series with missing values. Scientific Reports, 8(1):6085, 2018.
  URL https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-24271-9.
Edward Choi, Mohammad Taha Bahadori, Andy Schuetz, Walter F. Stewart, and Jimeng Sun.
  Doctor AI: Predicting clinical events via recurrent neural networks. In Proceedings of the 1st
  Machine Learning for Healthcare Conference, volume 56 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pages 301–318. PMLR, 18–19 Aug 2016. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/
  v56/Choi16.html.
Earl A Coddington and Norman Levinson. Theory of ordinary differential equations. Tata McGraw-
  Hill Education, 1955.
Laurent Dinh, David Krueger, and Yoshua Bengio. NICE: Non-linear independent components
  estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1410.8516, 2014.
Nan Du, Hanjun Dai, Rakshit Trivedi, Utkarsh Upadhyay, Manuel Gomez-Rodriguez, and Le Song.
  Recurrent marked temporal point processes: Embedding event history to vector. In International
  Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pages 1555–1564. ACM, 2016.
Patrick Farrell, David Ham, Simon Funke, and Marie Rognes. Automated derivation of the adjoint of
  high-level transient finite element programs. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 2013.
Michael Figurnov, Maxwell D Collins, Yukun Zhu, Li Zhang, Jonathan Huang, Dmitry Vetrov, and
 Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Spatially adaptive computation time for residual networks. arXiv preprint,
 2017.
J. Futoma, S. Hariharan, and K. Heller. Learning to Detect Sepsis with a Multitask Gaussian Process
   RNN Classifier. ArXiv e-prints, 2017.
Aidan N Gomez, Mengye Ren, Raquel Urtasun, and Roger B Grosse. The reversible residual network:
  Backpropagation without storing activations. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, pages 2211–2221, 2017.


                                                 10
Alex Graves. Adaptive computation time for recurrent neural networks.                arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1603.08983, 2016.
David Ha, Andrew Dai, and Quoc V Le. Hypernetworks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.09106, 2016.
Eldad Haber and Lars Ruthotto. Stable architectures for deep neural networks. Inverse Problems, 34
  (1):014004, 2017.
E. Hairer, S.P. Nørsett, and G. Wanner. Solving Ordinary Differential Equations I – Nonstiff Problems.
   Springer, 1987.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pages 770–778, 2016a.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Identity mappings in deep residual
  networks. In European conference on computer vision, pages 630–645. Springer, 2016b.
Geoffrey Hinton, Nitish Srivastava, and Kevin Swersky. Neural networks for machine learning lecture
  6a overview of mini-batch gradient descent, 2012.
Yacine Jernite, Edouard Grave, Armand Joulin, and Tomas Mikolov. Variable computation in
  recurrent neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.06188, 2016.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational Bayes. International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2014.
Diederik P Kingma, Tim Salimans, Rafal Jozefowicz, Xi Chen, Ilya Sutskever, and Max Welling.
  Improved variational inference with inverse autoregressive flow. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, pages 4743–4751, 2016.
W. Kutta. Beitrag zur näherungsweisen Integration totaler Differentialgleichungen. Zeitschrift für
 Mathematik und Physik, 46:435–453, 1901.
Yann LeCun, D Touresky, G Hinton, and T Sejnowski. A theoretical framework for back-propagation.
  In Proceedings of the 1988 connectionist models summer school, volume 1, pages 21–28. CMU,
  Pittsburgh, Pa: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to
  document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 86(11):2278–2324, 1998.
Yang Li. Time-dependent representation for neural event sequence prediction. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1708.00065, 2017.
Zachary C Lipton, David Kale, and Randall Wetzel. Directly modeling missing data in sequences with
  RNNs: Improved classification of clinical time series. In Proceedings of the 1st Machine Learning
  for Healthcare Conference, volume 56 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 253–
  270. PMLR, 18–19 Aug 2016. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v56/Lipton16.html.
Z. Long, Y. Lu, X. Ma, and B. Dong. PDE-Net: Learning PDEs from Data. ArXiv e-prints, 2017.
Yiping Lu, Aoxiao Zhong, Quanzheng Li, and Bin Dong. Beyond finite layer neural networks:
  Bridging deep architectures and numerical differential equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.10121,
  2017.
Dougal Maclaurin, David Duvenaud, and Ryan P Adams. Autograd: Reverse-mode differentiation of
  native Python. In ICML workshop on Automatic Machine Learning, 2015.
Hongyuan Mei and Jason M Eisner. The neural Hawkes process: A neurally self-modulating
  multivariate point process. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 6757–
  6767, 2017.


                                                 11
Valdemar Melicher, Tom Haber, and Wim Vanroose. Fast derivatives of likelihood functionals for
  ODE based models using adjoint-state method. Computational Statistics, 32(4):1621–1643, 2017.
Conny Palm. Intensitätsschwankungen im fernsprechverker. Ericsson Technics, 1943.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Soumith Chintala, Gregory Chanan, Edward Yang, Zachary DeVito,
  Zeming Lin, Alban Desmaison, Luca Antiga, and Adam Lerer. Automatic differentiation in
  pytorch. 2017.
Barak A Pearlmutter. Gradient calculations for dynamic recurrent neural networks: A survey. IEEE
  Transactions on Neural networks, 6(5):1212–1228, 1995.
Lev Semenovich Pontryagin, EF Mishchenko, VG Boltyanskii, and RV Gamkrelidze. The mathemat-
  ical theory of optimal processes. 1962.
M. Raissi and G. E. Karniadakis. Hidden physics models: Machine learning of nonlinear partial
 differential equations. Journal of Computational Physics, pages 125–141, 2018.
Maziar Raissi, Paris Perdikaris, and George Em Karniadakis. Multistep neural networks for data-
 driven discovery of nonlinear dynamical systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.01236, 2018a.
Maziar Raissi, Paris Perdikaris, and George Em Karniadakis. Numerical Gaussian processes for
 time-dependent and nonlinear partial differential equations. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing,
 40(1):A172–A198, 2018b.
Danilo J Rezende, Shakir Mohamed, and Daan Wierstra. Stochastic backpropagation and approximate
  inference in deep generative models. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pages 1278–1286, 2014.
Danilo Jimenez Rezende and Shakir Mohamed. Variational inference with normalizing flows. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1505.05770, 2015.
C. Runge. Über die numerische Auflösung von Differentialgleichungen. Mathematische Annalen, 46:
  167–178, 1895.
Lars Ruthotto and Eldad Haber. Deep neural networks motivated by partial differential equations.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.04272, 2018.
T. Ryder, A. Golightly, A. S. McGough, and D. Prangle. Black-box Variational Inference for
   Stochastic Differential Equations. ArXiv e-prints, 2018.
Michael Schober, David Duvenaud, and Philipp Hennig. Probabilistic ODE solvers with Runge-Kutta
 means. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 25, 2014.
Peter Schulam and Suchi Saria. What-if reasoning with counterfactual Gaussian processes. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1703.10651, 2017.
Hossein Soleimani, James Hensman, and Suchi Saria. Scalable joint models for reliable uncertainty-
  aware event prediction. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 2017a.
Hossein Soleimani, Adarsh Subbaswamy, and Suchi Saria. Treatment-response models for coun-
  terfactual reasoning with continuous-time, continuous-valued interventions. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1704.02038, 2017b.
Jos Stam. Stable fluids. In Proceedings of the 26th annual conference on Computer graphics and
  interactive techniques, pages 121–128. ACM Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., 1999.
Paul Stapor, Fabian Froehlich, and Jan Hasenauer. Optimization and uncertainty analysis of ODE
  models using second order adjoint sensitivity analysis. bioRxiv, page 272005, 2018.
Jakub M Tomczak and Max Welling. Improving variational auto-encoders using Householder flow.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.09630, 2016.
Steffen Wiewel, Moritz Becher, and Nils Thuerey. Latent-space physics: Towards learning the
  temporal evolution of fluid flow. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.10123, 2018.
Hong Zhang and Adrian Sandu. Fatode: a library for forward, adjoint, and tangent linear integration
  of ODEs. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 36(5):C504–C523, 2014.


                                                12
Appendix A           Proof of the Instantaneous Change of Variables Theorem
Theorem (Instantaneous Change of Variables). Let z(t) be a finite continuous random variable with probability
p(z(t)) dependent on time. Let dz  dt
                                      = f (z(t), t) be a differential equation describing a continuous-in-time
transformation of z(t). Assuming that f is uniformly Lipschitz continuous in z and continuous in t, then the
change in log probability also follows a differential equation:
                                                                       
                                        ∂ log p(z(t))            df
                                                        = −tr       (t)
                                               ∂t                dz

Proof. To prove this theorem, we take the infinitesimal limit of finite changes of log p(z(t)) through time. First
we denote the transformation of z over an ε change in time as
                                              z(t + ε) = Tε (z(t))                                           (14)
We assume that f is Lipschitz continuous in z(t) and continuous in t, so every initial value problem has a unique
solution by Picard’s existence theorem. We also assume z(t) is bounded. These conditions imply that f , Tε , and
 ∂
   T are all bounded. In the following, we use these conditions to exchange limits and products.
∂z ε

We can write the differential equation ∂ log ∂t
                                             p(z(t))
                                                     using the discrete change of variables formula, and the
definition of the derivative:
                                                               ∂
              ∂ log p(z(t))         log p(z(t)) − log det ∂z Tε (z(t)) − log p(z(t))
                            = lim                                                                            (15)
                   ∂t         ε→0 +                           ε
                                                ∂
                                      log det ∂z   Tε (z(t))
                            = − lim                                                                          (16)
                                ε→0+             ε
                                       ∂             ∂
                                          log det      T (z(t))
                                                    ∂z ε
                            = − lim ∂ε            ∂
                                                                        (by L’Hôpital’s rule)                (17)
                                ε→0 +
                                                  ∂ε
                                                     ε
                                       ∂        ∂                                           
                                           det ∂z Tε (z(t))               ∂ log(z)
                            = − lim ∂ε        ∂
                                                                                        =  1                 (18)
                                ε→0+     det ∂z Tε (z(t))                    ∂z    z=1
                                                                                       !
                                         ∂         ∂                           1
                            = − lim          det      Tε (z(t))     lim      ∂
                                                                                                             (19)
                                  ε→0+ ∂ε         ∂z               ε→0+ det    T (z(t))
                                |              {z               }|           ∂z ε
                                                                            {z            }
                                                bounded                          =1

                                     ∂      ∂
                             = − lim    det    Tε (z(t))                                                     (20)
                                ε→0+ ∂ε     ∂z
The derivative of the determinant can be expressed using Jacobi’s formula, which gives
                                                                             
               ∂ log p(z(t))                      ∂              ∂ ∂
                             = − lim tr adj          Tε (z(t))         Tε (z(t))                             (21)
                     ∂t            ε→0+          ∂z              ∂ε ∂z
                                                                                           
                                                                                     
                                                    ∂                        ∂ ∂
                             = −tr  lim adj           Tε (z(t))       lim        Tε (z(t))                 (22)
                                                                                           
                                     ε→0+         ∂z                ε→0+ ∂ε ∂z             
                                      |            {z             }
                                                      =I
                                                              
                                         ∂ ∂
                              = −tr lim        Tε (z(t))                                                     (23)
                                    ε→0+ ∂ε ∂z

Substituting Tε with its Taylor series expansion and taking the limit, we complete the proof.
                                                                                                 
              ∂ log p(z(t))                  ∂ ∂
                                                      z + εf (z(t), t) + O(ε2 ) + O(ε3 ) + . . .
                                                                                                 
                             = −tr lim                                                                       (24)
                   ∂t                 ε→0+ ∂ε ∂z
                                                                                                
                                             ∂          ∂
                             = −tr lim            I+       εf (z(t), t) + O(ε2 ) + O(ε3 ) + . . .            (25)
                                      ε→0+ ∂ε           ∂z
                                                                                   
                                               ∂                            2
                             = −tr lim            f (z(t), t) + O(ε) + O(ε ) + . . .                         (26)
                                      ε→0+    ∂z
                                                    
                                       ∂
                             = −tr       f (z(t), t)                                                         (27)
                                      ∂z




                                                          13
A.1     Special Cases
                                                                                      T
Planar CNF. Let f (z) = uh(wz + b), then ∂f
                                         ∂z
                                            = u ∂h
                                                ∂z
                                                   . Since the trace of an outer product is the inner
product, we have
                                                                  ∂h T
                                                                      
                                               ∂ log p(z)                      ∂h
                                                          = −tr u        = −uT                                        (28)
                                                   ∂t             ∂z           ∂z
This is the parameterization we use in all of our experiments.

Hamiltonian CNF. The continuous analog of NICE (Dinh et al., 2014) is a Hamiltonian flow, which splits
the data into two equal partitions and is a volume-preserving transformation, implying that ∂ log∂tp(z) = 0. We
can verify this. Let
                                            dz1:d                 
                                                dt       f (zd+1:D )
                                             dzd+1:D =                                                      (29)
                                                           g(z1:d )
                                                              dt

Then because the Jacobian is all zeros on its diagonal, the trace is zero. This is a volume-preserving flow.

A.2     Connection to Fokker-Planck and Liouville PDEs
The Fokker-Planck equation is a well-known partial differential equation (PDE) that describes the probability
density function of a stochastic differential equation as it changes with time. We relate the instantaneous change
of variables to the special case of Fokker-Planck with zero diffusion, the Liouville equation.
As with the instantaneous change of variables, let z(t) ∈ RD evolve through time following dz(t)
                                                                                            dt
                                                                                                 = f (z(t), t).
Then Liouville equation describes the change in density of z–a fixed point in space–as a PDE,
                                                            D
                                               ∂p(z, t)    X    ∂
                                                        =−          [fi (z, t)p(z, t)]                                (30)
                                                 ∂t        i=1
                                                               ∂z i


However, (30) cannot be easily used as it requires the partial derivatives of p(z,t)
                                                                               ∂z
                                                                                     , which is typically approximated
using finite difference. This type of PDE has its own literature on efficient and accurate simulation (Stam, 1999).
Instead of evaluating p(·, t) at a fixed point, if we follow the trajectory of a particle z(t), we obtain
      ∂p(z(t), t)             ∂p(z(t), t) ∂z(t)                                      ∂p(z(t), t)
                  =                                                  +
         ∂t                     ∂z(t)      ∂t                                           ∂t
                              |      {z       }                                      | {z }
                      partial derivative from first argument, z(t)       partial derivative from second argument, t

                      D                      D                              D
                      X∂p(z(t),  ∂z
                                 t)
                                        X
                                      (t)
                                    i         ∂fi (z(t), t)              X
                                                                                              
                                                                                             ∂p(z(t),  t)             (31)
                 =          
                        ∂zi (t)          −                   p(z(t), t) −     f i (z(t),
                                                                                         t)
                     
                   i=1
                                    ∂t     i=1
                                                    ∂z i                     
                                                                           i=1
                                                                           
                                                                                             ∂zi (t)

                         D
                         X ∂fi (z(t), t)
                 =−                                p(z(t), t)
                          i=1
                                      ∂zi

We arrive at the instantaneous change of variables by taking the log,
                                                                          D
                            ∂ log p(z(t), t)       1      ∂p(z(t), t)    X   ∂fi (z(t), t)
                                             =                        =−                                              (32)
                                   ∂t          p(z(t), t)    ∂t          i=1
                                                                                 ∂zi

While still a PDE, (32) can be combined with z(t) to form an ODE of size D + 1,
                                                                       
                                 d       z(t)               f (z(t), t)
                                                    =     PD ∂fi (z(t),t)                                             (33)
                                 dt log p(z(t), t)      − i=1         ∂t

Compared to the Fokker-Planck and Liouville equations, the instantaneous change of variables is of more
practical impact as it can be numerically solved much more easily, requiring an extra state of D for following
the trajectory of z(t). Whereas an approach based on finite difference approximation of the Liouville equation
would require a grid size that is exponential in D.


Appendix B             A Modern Proof of the Adjoint Method
We present an alternative proof to the adjoint method (Pontryagin et al., 1962) that is short and easy to follow.


                                                                             14
B.1      Continuous Backpropagation

Let z(t) follow the differential equation dz(t)
                                           dt
                                                = f (z(t), t, θ), where θ are the parameters. We will prove that if
we define an adjoint state
                                                            dL
                                                 a(t) =                                                       (34)
                                                           dz(t)
then it follows the differential equation
                                                 da(t)         ∂f (z(t), t, θ)
                                                       = −a(t)                                                                   (35)
                                                  dt               ∂z(t)
For ease of notation, we denote vectors as row vectors, whereas the main text uses column vectors.
The adjoint state is the gradient with respect to the hidden state at a specified time t. In standard neural networks,
the gradient of a hidden layer ht depends on the gradient from the next layer ht+1 by chain rule
                                                dL        dL dht+1
                                                     =                 .                                         (36)
                                               dht      dht+1 dht
With a continuous hidden state, we can write the transformation after an ε change in time as
                                           Z t+ε
                              z(t + ε) =          f (z(t), t, θ)dt + z(t) = Tε (z(t), t)                         (37)
                                                  t
and chain rule can also be applied
                               dL        dL    dz(t + ε)                                              ∂Tε (z(t), t)
                                    =                            or      a(t) = a(t + ε)                                         (38)
                              ∂z(t)   dz(t + ε) dz(t)                                                   ∂z(t)
The proof of (35) follows from the definition of derivative:
  da(t)        a(t + ε) − a(t)
        = lim                                                                                                                    (39)
   dt    ε→0+         ε
                                    ∂
               a(t + ε) − a(t + ε) ∂z(t) Tε (z(t))
        = lim                                                                                            (by Eq 38)              (40)
         ε→0 +                 ε
                                    ∂
                                          z(t) + εf (z(t), t, θ) + O(ε2 )
                                                                          
               a(t + ε) − a(t + ε) ∂z(t)
        = lim                                                                                            (Taylor series around z(t))
         ε→0+                               ε
                                                                                                                                 (41)
                                                                          
                           a(t + ε) − a(t + ε) I + ε ∂f (z(t),t,θ)
                                                         ∂z(t)
                                                                   + O(ε2 )
             = lim                                                                                                               (42)
                 ε→0+                                 ε
                           −εa(t + ε) ∂f (z(t),t,θ)
                                          ∂z(t)
                                                    + O(ε2 )
             = lim                                                                                                               (43)
                 ε→0+                 ε
                                ∂f (z(t), t, θ)
             = lim −a(t + ε)                    + O(ε)                                                                           (44)
               ε→0+                  ∂z(t)
                     ∂f (z(t), t, θ)
             = −a(t)                                                                                                             (45)
                         ∂z(t)
We pointed out the similarity between adjoint method and backpropagation (eq. 38). Similarly to backpropaga-
tion, ODE for the adjoint state needs to be solved backwards in time. We specify the constraint on the last time
point, which is simply the gradient of the loss wrt the last time point, and can obtain the gradients with respect to
the hidden state at any time, including the initial value.
                                                       Z t0                         Z t0
                 dL                                           da(t)                             ∂f (z(t), t, θ)
    a(tN ) =                       a(t0 ) = a(tN ) +                dt = a(tN ) −         a(t)T                 (46)
              dz(tN )                                    tN     dt                    tN            ∂z(t)
    |      {z        }             |                                     {z                                   }
 initial condition of adjoint diffeq.                                   gradient wrt. initial value

Here we assumed that loss function L depends only on the last time point tN . If function L depends also on
intermediate time points t1 , t2 , . . . , tN −1 , etc., we can repeat the adjoint step for each of the intervals [tN −1 , tN ],
[tN −2 , tN −1 ] in the backward order and sum up the obtained gradients.

B.2      Gradients wrt. θ and t
We can generalize (35) to obtain gradients with respect to θ–a constant wrt. t–and and the initial and end times,
t0 and tN . We view θ and t as states with constant differential equations and write
                                                      ∂θ(t)           dt(t)
                                                            =0              =1                                                   (47)
                                                       ∂t              dt

                                                                 15
We can then combine these with z to form an augmented state1 with corresponding differential equation and
adjoint state,
                                                              
    d z                              f ([z, θ, t])              a
         θ (t) = faug ([z, θ, t]) :=       0         , aaug := aθ  , aθ (t) := dL , at (t) := dL   (48)
   dt t                                     1                     a               dθ(t)          dt(t)
                                                                      t

Note this formulates the augmented ODE as an autonomous (time-invariant) ODE, but the derivations in the
previous section still hold as this is a special case of a time-variant ODE. The Jacobian of f has the form
                                                        ∂f ∂f ∂f 
                                           ∂faug         ∂z    ∂θ    ∂t
                                                     =0        0    0  (t)                                (49)
                                          ∂[z, θ, t]      0     0    0
where each 0 is a matrix of zeros with the appropriate dimensions. We plug this into (35) to obtain
               daaug (t)                                   ∂faug
                                                                      (t) = − a ∂f   a ∂f   a ∂f
                                                                                               
                         = − a(t)       aθ (t)   at (t)                         ∂z     ∂θ     ∂t
                                                                                                   (t)         (50)
                  dt                                       ∂[z, θ, t]
The first element is the adjoint differential equation (35), as expected. The second element can be used to obtain
the total gradient with respect to the parameters, by integrating over the full interval and setting aθ (tN ) = 0.
                                                        Z t0
                                   dL                             ∂f (z(t), t, θ)
                                       = aθ (t0 ) = −        a(t)                 dt                           (51)
                                   dθ                    tN            ∂θ
Finally, we also get gradients with respect to t0 and tN , the start and end of the integration interval.
                                                                             Z t0
           dL                                   dL                                      ∂f (z(t), t, θ)
                = a(tN )f (z(tN ), tN , θ)          = at (t0 ) = at (tN ) −        a(t)                 dt     (52)
          dtN                                   dt0                           tN              ∂t
Between (35), (46), (51), and (52) we have gradients for all possible inputs to an initial value problem solver.


Appendix C           Full Adjoint sensitivities algorithm
This more detailed version of Algorithm 1 includes gradients with respect to the start and end times of integration.

Algorithm 2 Complete reverse-mode derivative of an ODE initial value problem
Input: dynamics parameters θ, start time t0 , stop time t1 , final state z(t1 ), loss gradient ∂L/∂z(t1 )
   ∂L       ∂L T
   ∂t1 = ∂z(t1 ) f (z(t1 ), t1 , θ)                                              . Compute gradient w.r.t. t1
                    ∂L                ∂L
  s0 = [z(t1 ), ∂z(t   1)
                          , 0 |θ| , − ∂t1 ]                                   . Define initial augmented state
  def aug_dynamics([z(t), a(t), ·, ·], t, θ):                          . Define dynamics on augmented state
       return [f (z(t), t, θ), −a(t)T ∂f    ∂z , −a(t)T ∂f
                                                        ∂θ , −a(t)T ∂f
                                                                    ∂t ] . Compute vector-Jacobian products
            ∂L       ∂L ∂L
  [z(t0 ), ∂z(t0 ) , ∂θ , ∂t0 ] = ODESolve(s0 , aug_dynamics, t1 , t0 , θ)         . Solve reverse-time ODE
           ∂L      ∂L ∂L ∂L
return ∂z(t  0)
                ,     ,
                   ∂θ ∂t0 ∂t1,                                                          . Return all gradients




     1
       Note that we’ve overloaded t to be both a part of the state and the (dummy) independent variable. The
distinction is clear given context, so we keep t as the independent variable for consistency with the rest of the
text.


                                                           16
Appendix D              Autograd Implementation
import scipy . i n t e g r a t e

i m p o r t a u t o g r a d . numpy a s np
from a u t o g r a d . e x t e n d i m p o r t p r i m i t i v e , d e f v j p _ a r g n u m s
from a u t o g r a d i m p o r t make_vjp
from a u t o g r a d . m i s c i m p o r t f l a t t e n
from a u t o g r a d . b u i l t i n s i m p o r t t u p l e

odeint = primitive ( scipy . integrate . odeint )


d e f g r a d _ o d e i n t _ a l l ( y t , f u n c , y0 , t , f u n c _ a r g s , ∗∗ k w a r g s ) :
      # E x t e n d e d from " S c a l a b l e I n f e r e n c e o f O r d i n a r y D i f f e r e n t i a l
      # E q u a t i o n Models o f B i o c h e m i c a l P r o c e s s e s " , Sec . 2 . 4 . 2
      # F a b i a n F r o e h l i c h , C a r o l i n Loos , J a n H a s e n a u e r , 2017
      # h t t p s : / / a r x i v . org / pdf /1711.08079. pdf

      T , D = np . s h a p e ( y t )
      flat_args , unflatten = f l a t t e n ( func_args )

       def f l a t _ f u n c (y , t , f l a t _ a r g s ) :
           r e t u r n func ( y , t , ∗ u n f l a t t e n ( f l a t _ a r g s ) )

       def unpack ( x ) :
           #           y,           vjp_y ,        vjp_t ,      vjp_args
           r e t u r n x [ 0 : D] , x [D: 2 ∗ D] , x [ 2 ∗ D] , x [ 2 ∗ D + 1 : ]

       def augmented_dynamics ( augmented_state , t , f l a t _ a r g s ) :
           # O r g i n a l s y s t e m a u g m e n t e d w i t h v j p _ y , v j p _ t and v j p _ a r g s .
           y , vjp_y , _ , _ = unpack ( a u g m e n t e d _ s t a t e )
           v j p _ a l l , d y _ d t = make_vjp ( f l a t _ f u n c , argnum = ( 0 , 1 , 2 ) ) ( y , t , f l a t _ a r g s )
           v j p _ y , v j p _ t , v j p _ a r g s = v j p _ a l l (− v j p _ y )
           r e t u r n np . h s t a c k ( ( d y _ d t , v j p _ y , v j p _ t , v j p _ a r g s ) )

       def v j p _ a l l ( g ,∗∗ kwargs ) :

              v j p _ y = g [ −1 , : ]
              vjp_t0 = 0
              time_vjp_list = []
              v j p _ a r g s = np . z e r o s ( np . s i z e ( f l a t _ a r g s ) )

              f o r i i n r a n g e ( T − 1 , 0 , −1):

                     # Compute e f f e c t o f moving c u r r e n t t i m e .
                     v j p _ c u r _ t = np . d o t ( f u n c ( y t [ i , : ] , t [ i ] , ∗ f u n c _ a r g s ) , g [ i , : ] )
                     t i m e _ v j p _ l i s t . append ( v j p _ c u r _ t )
                     vjp_t0 = vjp_t0 − vjp_cur_t

                     # Run a u g m e n t e d s y s t e m b a c k w a r d s t o t h e p r e v i o u s o b s e r v a t i o n .
                     aug_y0 = np . h s t a c k ( ( y t [ i , : ] , v j p _ y , v j p _ t 0 , v j p _ a r g s ) )
                     a u g _ a n s = o d e i n t ( a u g m e n t e d _ d y n a m i c s , aug_y0 ,
                                                   np . a r r a y ( [ t [ i ] , t [ i − 1 ] ] ) , t u p l e ( ( f l a t _ a r g s , ) ) , ∗∗ k w a r g s )
                     _ , vjp_y , vjp_t0 , v j p _ a r g s = unpack ( aug_ans [ 1 ] )

                     # Add g r a d i e n t from c u r r e n t o u t p u t .
                     vjp_y = vjp_y + g [ i − 1 , : ]

              t i m e _ v j p _ l i s t . append ( v j p _ t 0 )
              v j p _ t i m e s = np . h s t a c k ( t i m e _ v j p _ l i s t ) [ : : − 1 ]

           r e t u r n None , v j p _ y , v j p _ t i m e s , u n f l a t t e n ( v j p _ a r g s )
       return vjp_all



                                                                 17
def grad_argnums_wrapper ( a l l _ v j p _ b u i l d e r ) :
    # A g e n e r i c a u t o g r a d h e l p e r f u n c t i o n . Takes a f u n c t i o n t h a t
    # b u i l d s v j p s f o r a l l a r g u m e n t s , and w r a p s i t t o r e t u r n o n l y r e q u i r e d v j p s .
    d e f b u i l d _ s e l e c t e d _ v j p s ( argnums , ans , c o m b i n e d _ a r g s , k w a r g s ) :
          v j p _ f u n c = a l l _ v j p _ b u i l d e r ( ans , ∗ c o m b i n e d _ a r g s , ∗∗ k w a r g s )
          def chosen_vjps ( g ) :
                  # R e t u r n w h i c h e v e r v j p s were a s k e d f o r .
                  a l l _ v j p s = vjp_func ( g )
                  r e t u r n [ a l l _ v j p s [ argnum ] f o r argnum i n argnums ]
          return chosen_vjps
    return build_selected_vjps

defvjp_argnums ( odeint , grad_argnums_wrapper ( g r a d _ o d e i n t _ a l l ) )

Appendix E           Algorithm for training the latent ODE model
To obtain the latent representation zt0 , we traverse the sequence using RNN and obtain parameters of distribution
q(zt0 |{xti , ti }i , θenc ). The algorithm follows a standard VAE algorithm with an RNN variational posterior and
an ODESolve model:

       1. Run an RNN encoder through the time series and infer the parameters for a posterior over zt0 :
                                          q(zt0 |{xti , ti }i , φ) = N (zt0 |µzt0 , σz0 ),                          (53)
          where µz0 , σz0 comes from hidden state of RNN({xti , ti }i , φ)
       2. Sample zt0 ∼ q(zt0 |{xti , ti }i )
       3. Obtain zt1 , zt2 , . . . , ztM by solving ODE ODESolve(zt0 , f, θf , t0 , . . . , tM ), where f is the function
          defining the gradient dz/dt as a function of z
       4. Maximize ELBO = M
                                     P
                                       i=1 log p(xti |zti , θx ) + log p(zt0 ) − log q(zt0 |{xti , ti }i , φ),
          where p(zt0 ) = N (0, 1)


Appendix F           Extra Figures




                                                                                                                Ground Truth
                                                                                                                Observation
                                                                                                                Prediction
                                                                                                                Extrapolation




       (a) 30 time points                  (b) 50 time points                  (c) 100 time points
Figure 10: Spiral reconstructions using a latent ODE with a variable number of noisy observations.




                                                          18
